Hello friends in this video let us learn about insertion
sort
So insertion sort is an efficient algorithm for sorting a
small number of elements
It is similar to arranging the playing cards
So what will we do when we have a handful
of playing cards Before we start the game We will
sort all the cards so that we can make smart
decisions
So we will assume the first card is in the
correct position
From the second card we will take the card and
compare it with its previous card and if it is smaller than
the first card
We will rearrange the cards
Otherwise we will simply place it in its actual position
Similarly we will repeat the process
For all the cards so let us assume
The first card 40 is in the correct position
Now take the second card which is ten and compare
it with the previous card
40 in 10 is less than 40 so we how
to rearrange the card now the first two cards are
sorted Now
Take the third card which is 50 and compare it
with the previous card which is 40 and 50 is
greater than 40 so no need to move the cards
and place it in its actual position
Now the first three cards are sorted
Now take the fourth card which is 30 and compare
it with the previous cards
50 and 30 is less than 50
So moved the card 50 to fourth place again compare
30 with the current previous card which is 40 and
thirties lesser than 40
So moved the cards 40 to 3rd position again compared 30
with the current previous card
which is 10 30 is greater than 10 so no
need to move the cards and place the card 30
in the second position
Now take the fifth card which is 20 and compare
it with the previous card
50 and 20 is less than 50 so move the
card 50 to fifth place again compare 20 with
current
Previous card which is 40 and 20 is lesser than
40 so bring 40 to fourth place again compare 20
with
The current previous card which is 30 and 20 is
lesser than 30
So bring 30 to third place again compare 20
with the current previous card which is 10 and 20
is greater than 10 so no need to move the
cards and place 20 at this position
And now see we got all the cards in the
shorter order let us take some number and understand
the insertion sort procedure
so let us take the numbers 40 10 50 30 and 20
and as we have discussed earlier assumed the first number
40 is sorted
Now take the second number 10 and compare it with
40 and 40 is greater than 10
So move the number 40 to 2nd place in place number
10 in the first position
So now the first two numbers are sorted
Now take the third number which is 50 and compare
it with the previous number 40 and 50 is greater
than 40 so no need to change the positions now
The first three numbers are sorted now take the fourth
number which is 30 and compare it with the previous
number
50 and 30 is lesser than 50 so 50 should
only come after 30
So place 50 in the fourth position now compare 30
with the current previous number which is 40 and thirties
Lesser than 40 so place 40 in the third position
now compare 30 with the current previous number which is
ten and 30 is greater than 10
So no moves
are needed so simply place 30 in the second position and
10 in its actual position
Now the first four numbers are sorted
Now take the fifth number which is 20 and compare
it with the previous number 50 and Twentys lesser than
So 50 should only come after 20
Hence we have to place 50 in the fifth position
now compared 20 with the current previous number which is
40 and twenties lesser than 40
So place 40 in the fourth position now compared 20
with the current previous number which is 30 and
20 is less than 30
So Place 30 in the third position now compared 20
with the current previous number which is ten and 20
is greater than 10
So no Moves are needed and we can place 20
in the second position and 10 in its actual position
Now all five numbers are sorted and that is how
insertion sort sorts the elements
Now let us build the algorithm for insertion sort using
this process
So as we discussed in insertion sort we always assume
the first element as sorted
So we will start our process from the second index
that is index one
So write the loop from index one to size next
We need to find the correct place and place the
value one by one
So copy the current value and declare one more variable
to compare and find the correct position
so let it be the index and copy the current index to it
So index equal to I
And if index is greater than zero we need to
check if the previous value is greater than the current
index value
And if so we need to move the previous value
to one position
Right
And we need to do the same process for all
the previous elements so write it in a while
loop that is while index greater than zero and arr
of index minus one greater than value
And if the condition is true we need to copy
the previous element to current index position
So write arr  of index equal to arr  of index
minus one
And in order to continue the process for all the
previous elements the decrement the index by one and if the
while execution is over we can confirm that we have
found the correct place for the value and the variable
index will have that position so place the copied
value to arr  of index
That is arr  of index equal to value
And this is the algorithm for insertion sort and let
us understand how it will work for the element 30
here
First let us copy the value 30 to variable value and
place index in variable index to check
All the previous elements here index is greater than zero
so check
If arr  of index minus one is greater than value
that is if 50 is greater than 30 and it
is so place arr  of index minus
one to arr  of index so 50 will be copied
to index three now reduce the index value now
again
check
The while condition now also indexes greater than zero so
If arr  of index minus one is greater than value
that is if 40 is greater than 30 and it
is true so place arr  of index
minus
one to arr  of index so 40 will be copy
to index two now reduce the index value so index
equal to one Now now check
The condition again and index is one now which is
still greater than zero
So check if arr  of index minus one is greater
than value that is if 10 is greater than
30 and it is not so the loop will be
terminated
Now place the value 30 in arr  of index so
30 will be placed in index one which is perfect
here
And that is how insertion sort algorithm works
And in the next video we will discuss the implementation
of insertion sort in detail.